So, throughout this week, we talked
about the computer architecture and
how the various shapes are synthesized
into a single overall architecture and
in project five you actually have
to build this architecture and
test it using our project materials.
So, the purpose of this unit is
to give you all sorts of tips and
advice on how to do it.
Well, before we get started,
I want to begin with some overall,
broad overview of what we have done so
far.
Or what we are doing in
the course in general.
Well, we are building a computer, and
the computer is implemented
as a very high level chip.
And this chip makes use of two main
components, CPU and a memory unit.
The memory, in turn, consists of several
RAM units which are pieced together,
and every one of these RAM units is
basically a collection of many registers.
The CPU also includes several registers,
if you recall, the D register,
the A register.
It also includes a program counter, and,
of course,
the ALU that we built in project two.
We can continue to resolve
these chip parts into simpler or
more basic chip parts.
For example, the program counter
makes use of a register and an adder,
and the ALU also makes use of
another instance of an adder chip.
And, of course, all these chips at
the end of the story, are based on
elementary logic gates, those that you
built in the first week of the course.
And also, other chips, higher level chips,
make direct use every once in a while,
of these lower level gates.
Now if we look at what I've
just described, bottom up,
then in project one,
we built the elementary logic gates.
In project two, we built the family
of adders that led up to the ALU.
In project three, we built a family of
registers that ended up with RAM units.
And finally, in this project, we are going
to take the fruits of all this hard work,
and put it together into
a complete computer system.
So, basically, we have to implement
the CPU, the memory unit,
and then we have to implement the
syntheses of these two high level chips,
into a complete working
general purpose computer.
So, that's what we'll do in project five.
So, here is the abstraction
of the Hack computer.
And here is also, the implementation
that we discussed in the previous units.
And we see that the architecture
is based on a CPU,
a data memory unit, and an instruction
memory unit, which we called, ROM.
So, let us begin with the CPU.
Once again, here is the CPU,
in in abstract terms.
We see we see here, the API, or
the input and output units of the CPU.
And if we delve into the implementation,
get this diagram,
that we discussed earlier in the course.
And here are some tips on how to
build this relatively complex chip.
Well, first of all, if you look carefully,
you will see that all the chip parts here
are chips that we've built
before in previous projects.
So, it's just a matter of taking these
chips off the shelf, so to speak,
and piecing them together
in some clever way.
So how do you do it?
Well, another inspection of this diagram,
reveals that we have all these C
control bits, that you see here.
And, most of these control bits
come from the current instruction.
So here's, for example,
a C instruction that consists,
if you recall, of several fields.
And I used color which is, obviously is,
is meaningless for the computer but,
it helps me communicate with you so,
we see an instruction coming in.
And your job as,
the designer of this chip,
is to unpack these control bits and
send them, or
route them, using HDL,
to their correct destinations in
the various chip parts that
make the overall architecture.
So, if you do this carefully,
if you figure out which control bit has
to go where, you will basically glue all
these parts together in a logical way and
and at the end of this synthesis,
you will get an overall CPU architecture.
Now actually I, I really glossed over
quite a few details because it's not just
a matter of taking these control date,
bits and
sending them to some destinations.
You may have to add some logic
that does some processing
of some of these control bits,
in order to achieve the desired effect.
And also bear in mind,
that there are also some control
bits that come out of the ALU.
If you look at the diagram,
I actually forgot to circle them as well.
These control bits also play an important
role in in the overall architecture.
And once again, you have to write some
HDL logic that takes these control bits,
combines them with some other information
that comes from the instruction, and and
piece them together in a way that
achieves the desired effect.
Now, we have intentionally,
we haven't given you exact
instructions on how to do it.
And intentionally, we just use this
catch-all C label, because we, we want you
to think about it and figure out yourself
how to put all these things together.
Once you do it, you will achieve
the overall architecture of the CPU.
Here is also the stub file
that we are giving you.
The stub file contains,
you know the documentation of the CPU,
the names of the input and
output units, and
then obviously you have to provide
the the missing implementation.
All right, so, moving along,
we have resolved the CPU, and
the next thing that I want to
discuss is the memory unit.
The data memory unit which is the,
the unit that contains the,
the running program and the data that
the program generates, the variables.
And in a higher level language objects
arrays, and so on and so forth.
All right, so
this is the memory abstraction.
It's a single address
space that has an in,
an address input, and an out, output.
And it also has this nice side
effect of refreshing the screen and
probing what the user is
is doing with the keyboard.
Now the overall address
space of of the Hack
memory consists of three logical segments.
Now there's no physical separation, but
there's a logical separation, if you will.
So the first 16K of
the memory are dedicated to
the running program and, and
the data that it generates.
The next 8K of the memory
are dedicated to a screen memory map,
and the last register in the memory is
represents the keyboard memory map.
So, how do we build it?
Well, we have to realize this abstraction
using chips that we already built before.
And here is some high level
diagram of this, architecture.
So we have three basic chips.
We have the RAM chip that
we built in project three.
Then we have a built-in screen chip which
essentially is just a regular memory chip,
so it's not really terribly
interesting to implement it,
if you implemented the RAM before.
But, it has the very nice side effect
of refreshing the physical screen.
And finally, we have a humble
register called, keyboard which
holds the currently pressed, the scan
code of the currently pressed key.
So, you have to write HDL code
that takes an incoming address,
whatever this address may, be and
funnel this address to the right chip part
within the the overall address space.
So if the address is below 16k,
well, there's nothing to do with it.
You simply retrieve the right
register from the RAM chip part.
But if the address is between 16,384, and
24,575, then you have to do something
to take this address and, and
route it to the right address
in the screen, memory chip.
And finally, if the address is 24,576,
then you want to route it to
the to the keyboard memory map.
So, that's basically what your HDL
code has to do, and if you will do it,
you will achieve this glue that
holds together these chip parts and
delivers the overall
functionality of the data memory.
All right, so we've resolved the CPU and
the memory, and
the only thing that remains to do is
to figure out how to implement the ROM.
Well the ROM is really
a simpler version of the RAM.
It's, it's just, it's, it's a RAM chip and
yet, it's, it's a read-only device.
So, it's actually easier
to build than a RAM chip.
And therefore, we decided not to bother
with with asking you to build it,
and we supply it as a built-in chip.
We didn't do it only for that reason.
We also, we, we, we supplied built-in
version of the ROM because we also
endode, endowed this built-in chip
with the ability to load the program
within the the hardware simulator.
So it's very convenient that we
have this built-in chip, and
all you have to do is take it and
plug it into the overall architecture.
So this is probably the easiest
thing to do in this project.
So, that's it.
We we built all the the three components
that make up the architecture and
the only thing that remains is to actually
effect in HDL the very diagram
that you see here in front of you.
So, we have to write a few HDL statements
that connect the CPU to the memory,
and the ROM 32K, in the same way
that you see here in the diagram.
How do we do it?
Well, we start with a, a stub file that
gives you the API of the computer, and
then you write a few lines
of HDL code that basically
implement this diagram in HDL.
In order to do this project, as usual,
you have to go to the website.
Read the project page that gives
you all sorts of the documentation
about the files that
you are going to need.
All these files are already
available on your computer,
as part of the NAND to Tetris folder.
So you're all set and you have
everything you need in order to finally
complete the computer architecture.
There are a few more resources, as usual
that you are, you're welcome to use.
And, that's it.
If you do that you will end
up having a running computer.
And and this will be the end of
the hardware part of this course.
The next unit as usual, is Perspectives.